Faster, Practical GLL Parsing
Ali Afroozeh and Anastasia Izmaylova
Centrum Wiskunde & Informatica, 1098 XG Amsterdam, The Netherlands
{ali.afroozeh, anastasia.izmaylova}@cwi.nl

Abstract. Generalized LL (GLL) parsing is an extension of recursivedescent (RD) parsing that supports all context-free grammars in cubic
time and space. GLL parsers have the direct relationship with the grammar that RD parsers have, and therefore, compared to GLR, are easier
to understand, debug, and extend. This makes GLL parsing attractive
for parsing programming languages.
In this paper we propose a more eﬃcient Graph-Structured Stack
(GSS) for GLL parsing that leads to signiﬁcant performance improvement. We also discuss a number of optimizations that further improve
the performance of GLL. Finally, for practical scannerless parsing of programming languages, we show how common lexical disambiguation ﬁlters
can be integrated in GLL parsing.
Our new formulation of GLL parsing is implemented as part of the
Iguana parsing framework. We evaluate the eﬀectiveness of our approach
using a highly-ambiguous grammar and grammars of real programming
languages. Our results, compared to the original GLL, show a speedup
factor of 10 on the highly-ambiguous grammar, and a speedup factor of
1.5, 1.7, and 5.2 on the grammars of Java, C#, and OCaml, respectively.

1

Introduction

Developing eﬃcient parsers for programming languages is a diﬃcult task that
is usually automated by a parser generator. Since Knuth’s seminal paper [1] on
LR parsing, and DeRemer’s work on practical LR parsing (LALR) [2], parsers of
many major programming languages have been constructed using LALR parser
generators such as Yacc [3].
Grammars of most real programming languages, when written in their most
natural form, are often ambiguous and do not ﬁt deterministic classes of contextfree grammars such as LR(k). Therefore, such grammars need to be gradually
transformed to conform to these deterministic classes. Not only is this process
time consuming and error prone, but the resulting derivation trees may also considerably diﬀer from those of the original grammar. In addition, writing a deterministic grammar for a programming language requires the grammar writer to
think more in terms of the parsing technology, rather than the intended grammar. Finally, maintaining a deterministic grammar is problematic. A real-world
example is the grammar of Java. In the ﬁrst version of the Java Language Speciﬁcation [4], the grammar was represented in an LALR(1) form, but this format
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 2015
B. Franke (Ed.): CC 2015, LNCS 9031, pp. 89–108, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-662-46663-6_5

90

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

has been abandoned in later versions, most likely due to the diﬃculties of maintaining an LALR(1) grammar as the language evolved.
Generalized LR (GLR) [5] is an extension of LR parsing that eﬀectively handles shift/reduce conﬂicts in separate stacks, merged as a Graph Structured
Stack (GSS) to trim exponentiality. As GLR parsers can deal with any contextfree grammar, there is no restriction on the grammar. Moreover, GLR can behave
linearly on LR grammars, and therefore, it is possible to build practical GLR
parsers for programming languages [6,7].
Although GLR parsers accept any context-free grammar, they have a complicated execution model, inherited from LR parsing. LR parsing is based on the
LR-automata, which is usually large and diﬃcult to understand. As a result, LR
parsers are hard to modify, and it is hard to produce good error messages. Many
major programming languages have switched from LR-based parser generators,
such as Yacc, to hand-written recursive-descent parsers. For example, GNU’s
GCC and Clang, two major C++ front-ends, have switched from LR(k) parser
generators to hand-written recursive-descent parsers1.
Recursive-descent (RD) parsers are a procedural interpretation of a grammar, directly encoded in a programming language. The straightforward execution model of RD parsers makes them easy to understand and modify. However,
RD parsers do not support left-recursive rules and have worst-case exponential runtime. Generalized LL (GLL) [8] is a generalization of RD parsing that
can deal with any context-free grammar, including the ones with left recursive rules, in cubic time and space. GLL uses GSS to handle multiple function
call stacks, which also solves the problem of left recursion by allowing cycles
in the GSS. GLL parsers maintain the direct relationship with the grammar
that RD parsers have, and therefore, provide an easy to understand execution
model. Finally, GLL parsers can be written by hand and can be debugged in
a programming language IDE. This makes GLL parsing attractive for parsing
programming languages.
Contributions. We ﬁrst identify a problem with the GSS in GLL parsing that
leads to ineﬃcient sharing of parsing results, and propose a new GSS that provides better sharing. We show that the new GSS results in signiﬁcant performance improvement, while preserving the worst-case cubic complexity of GLL
parsing. Second, we discuss a number of other optimizations that further improve the performance of GLL parsing. Third, we demonstrate how common
lexical disambiguation ﬁlters, such as follow restrictions and keyword exclusion,
can be implemented in a GLL parser. These ﬁlters are essential for scannerless
parsing of real programming languages. The new GSS, the optimizations, and
the lexical disambiguation ﬁlters are implemented as part of the Iguana parsing
framework, which is available at https://github.com/cwi-swat/iguana.
Organization of the paper. The rest of this paper is organized as follows. GLL
parsing is introduced in Section 2. The problem with the original GSS in GLL
1

http://clang.llvm.org/features.html#unifiedparser
http://gcc.gnu.org/wiki/New_C_Parser

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

91

parsing is explained in Section 2.3, and the new, more eﬃcient GSS is introduced in Section 3. Section 4 gives a number of optimizations for implementing
faster GLL parsers. Section 5 discusses the implementation of common lexical
disambiguation mechanisms in GLL. Section 6 evaluates the performance of GLL
parsers with the new GSS, compared to the original GSS, using a highly ambiguous grammar and grammars of real programming languages such as Java,
C# and OCaml. Section 7 discusses related work on generalized parsing and disambiguation. Finally, Section 8 concludes this paper and discusses future work.

2

GLL Parsing

2.1

Preliminaries

A context-free grammar is composed of a set of nonterminals N , a set of terminals
T , a set of rules P , and a start symbol S which is a nonterminal. A rule is written
as A ::= α, where A (head) is a nonterminal and α (body) is a string in (T ∪N )∗ .
Rules with the same head can be grouped as A ::= α1 | α2 | . . . | αp , where each
αk is called an alternative of A. A derivation step is written as αAβ⇒αγβ,
where A ::= γ is a rule, and α and β are strings in (T ∪ N )∗ . A derivation is a
∗
possibly empty sequence of derivation steps from α to β and is written as α⇒β.
A derivation is left-most if in each step the left most nonterminal is replaced by
its body. A sentential form is a derivation from the start symbol. A sentence
is a sentential form that only consists of terminal symbols. A sentence is called
ambiguous if it has more than one left-most derivation.
2.2

The GLL Parsing Algorithm

The Generalized LL (GLL) parsing algorithm [8] is a fully general, worst-case
cubic extension of recursive-descent (RD) parsing that supports all context-free
grammars. In GLL parsing, the worst-case cubic runtime and space complexities are achieved by using a Graph-Structured Stack (GSS) and constructing
a binarized Shared Packed Parse Forest (SPPF). GSS allows to eﬃciently handle multiple function call stacks, while a binarized SPPF solves the problem of
unbounded polynomial complexity of Tomita-style SPPF construction [9]. GLL
solves the problem of left recursion in RD parsing by allowing cycles in the GSS.
GLL parsing can be viewed as a grammar traversal process guided by the
input string. At each point during execution, a GLL parser is at a grammar slot
(grammar position) L, and maintains three variables: cI for the current input
position, cU for the current GSS node, and cN for the the current SPPF node. A
grammar slot is of the form X ::= α · β and corresponds to a grammar position
before or after any symbol in the body of a grammar rule, similar to LR(0)
items. A GSS node corresponds to a function call in an RD parser, and is of the
form (L, i), where L is a grammar slot of the form X ::= αA · β, i.e., after a
nonterminal, and i is the current input position when the node is created. Note
that the grammar slot of a GSS node eﬀectively records the return grammar

92

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

position, needed to continue parsing after returning from a nonterminal. A GSS
edge is of the form (v, w, u), where v and u are the source and target GSS nodes,
respectively, and w is an SPPF node recorded on the edge.
GLL parsers produce a binarized SPPF. In an SPPF, nodes with the same
subtrees are shared, and diﬀerent derivations of a node are attached via packed
nodes. A binarized SPPF introduces intermediate nodes, which eﬀectively group
the symbols of an alternative in a left-associative manner. An example of a
binarized SPPF, resulting from parsing "abc" using the grammar S ::= aBc | Ac,
A ::= ab, B ::= b is as follows:
S, 0, 3

A ::= aB · c, 0, 2

a, 0, 1

A, 0, 2

c, 2, 3

B, 1, 2

b, 1, 2

A binarized SPPF has three types of nodes. Symbol nodes of the form (x, i, j),
where x is a terminal or nonterminal, and i and j are the left and right extents,
respectively, indicating the substring recognized by x. Intermediate nodes of
the form (A ::= α · β, i, j), where |α|, |β| > 0, and i and j are the left and
right extents, respectively. Terminal nodes are leaf nodes, while nonterminal
and intermediate nodes have packed nodes as children. A packed node (shown as
circles in the SPPF above) is of the form (A ::= α · β, k), where k, the pivot, is
the right extent of the left child. A packed node has at most two children, both
non-packed nodes. A packed node represents a derivation, thus, a nonterminal
or intermediate node having more than one packed node is ambiguous.
As mentioned before, a GLL parser holds a pointer to the current SPPF
node, cN , and at the beginning of each alternative, cN is set to the dummy
node, $. As the parser traverses an alternative, it creates terminal nodes by
calls getNodeT(t, i, j), where t is a terminal, and i and j are the left and right
extents, respectively. Nonterminal and intermediate nodes are created by calls
getNodeP(A ::= α · β, w, z), where w and z are the left and right children, respectively. This function ﬁrst searches for an existing nonterminal node (A, i, j),
if |β| = 0, or intermediate node (A ::= α·β, i, j), where i and j are the left extent
of w and the right extent of z, respectively. If such a node exists, it is retrieved,
otherwise created. Then, w and z are attached to the node via a packed node,
if such a packed node does not exist.
In GLL parsing, when the parser reaches a non-deterministic point, e.g., a
nonterminal with multiple alternatives, it creates descriptors, which capture the
parsing states corresponding to each choice, and adds them to a set, so that
they can be processed later. A descriptor is of the form (L, u, i, w), where L
is a grammar slot, u is a GSS node, i is an input position, and w is an SPPF
node. A GLL parser maintains two sets of descriptors: R for pending descriptors,

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

93

and U for storing all the descriptors created during the parsing, to eliminate the
duplicate descriptors. A descriptor is added to R, via a call to function add, only
if it does not exist in U. In addition, a set P is maintained to store and reuse the
results of parsing associated with GSS nodes, i.e., the elements of the form (u, z),
where z is an SPPF node. A GLL parser has a main loop that in each iteration,
removes a descriptor from R, sets cU , cI , and cN to the respective values in the
descriptor, and jumps to execute the code associated with the grammar slot of
the descriptor. An example of a GLL parser is given below for the grammar Γ0 :
A ::= aAb | aAc | a.
R := ∅; P := ∅; U := ∅
cU := (L0 , 0); cI := 0; cN := $
L0 :if (R = ∅)
remove(L, u, i, w) from R
cU := u; cI := i; cN := w; goto L
else if (there exists a node (A, 0, n))
report success
else report failure

LA :add(A ::= .aAb, cU , cI , $)
add(A ::= .aAc, cU , cI , $)
add(A ::= .a, cU , cI , $)
goto L0

L·aAb :if (I[cI ] = a)
L·aAc :if (I[cI ] = a)
cN := getNodeT(a, cI , cI + 1)
cN := getNodeT(a, cI , cI + 1)
else goto L0
else goto L0
cI := cI + 1
cI := cI + 1
cU := create(A ::= aA · b, cU , cI , cN )
cU := create(A ::= aA · c, cU , cI , cN )
goto LA
goto LA
LaA·b :if (I[cI ] = b)
LaA·c :if (I[cI ] = c)
cR := getNodeT(b, cI , cI + 1)
cR := getNodeT(c, cI , cI + 1)
else goto L0
else goto L0
cI := cI + 1
cI := cI + 1
cN := getNodeP(A ::= aAb·, cN , cR )
cN := getNodeP(A ::= aAc·, cN , cR )
pop(cU , cI , cN ); goto L0
pop(cU , cI , cN ); goto L0

We describe the execution of a GLL parser by explaining the steps of the parser
at diﬀerent grammar slots. Here, and in the rest of the paper, we do not include
the check for ﬁrst/follow sets in the discussion. We also assume that the input
string, of length n, is available as an array I. Parsing starts by calling the start
symbol at input position 0. At this moment, cU is initialized by the default
GSS node u0 = (L0 , 0), where L0 does not correspond to any actual grammar
position. Let X be a nonterminal deﬁned as X ::= α1 | α2 | . . . | αp . A GLL parser
starts by creating and adding descriptors, each corresponding to the beginning
of an alternative: (X ::= ·αk , cU , cI , $). Then, the parser goes to L0 .
Based on the current grammar slot, a GLL parser continues as follows. If the
grammar slot is of the form X ::= α · tβ, the parser is before a terminal. If
I[cI ] = t, the parser jumps to L0 , terminating this execution path, otherwise
a terminal node is created by getNodeT(t, cI , cI + 1). If |α| ≥ 1, the terminal
node is assigned to cR , and an intermediate or nonterminal node is created by

94

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

getNodeP(X ::= αt · β, cN , cR ), and assigned to cN . The parser proceeds with
the next grammar slot.
If the grammar slot is of the form X ::= α · Aβ, i.e., before a nonterminal, the
create function is called with four arguments: the grammar slot X ::= αA · β,
cU , cI , and cN . First, create either retrieves a GSS node (X ::= αA · β, cI ) if
such a node exists, or creates one. Let v be (X ::= αA · β, cI ). Then, a GSS
edge (v, cN , cU ) is added from v to cU , if such an edge does not exists. If v was
retrieved, the currently available results of parsing A at cI are reused to continue
parsing: for each element (v, z) in P, a descriptor (X ::= αA·β, cU , h, y) is added,
where y is the SPPF node returned by getNodeP(X ::= αA · β, cN , z), and h
is the right extent of z. Finally, the call to create returns v, which is assigned
to cU . Then, the parser jumps to the deﬁnition of A and adds a descriptor for
each of its alternatives.
If the grammar slot is of the form A ::= α·, the parser is at the end of an
alternative, and therefore, should return from A to the calling rule and continue
parsing. This corresponds to the return from a function call in an RD parser. The
pop function is called with three arguments: cU , cI , cN . Let (L, j) be the label
of cU . First, the element (cU , cN ) is added to set P. Then, for each outgoing
edge (cU , z, v) from cU , a descriptor of the form (L, v, cI , y) is created, where
y is the SPPF node returned by getNodeP(L, z, cN ). Parsing terminates and
reports success if all descriptors in R are processed and an SPPF node labeled
(S, 0, n), corresponding to the start symbol and the whole input string, is found,
otherwise reports failure.
2.3

Problems with the Original GSS in GLL Parsing

To illustrate the problems with the original GSS in GLL parsing, we consider the
grammar Γ0 (Section 2.2) and the input string "aac". Parsing this input string
results in the GSS shown in Figure 1(a). The resulting GSS has two separate
GSS nodes for each input position, 1 and 2, and each GSS node corresponds to
an instance of A in one of the two alternatives: aAb or aAc. This implies that,
for example, the following two descriptors, corresponding to the beginning of the
ﬁrst alternative of A, are created and added to R: (A ::= ·aAb, u1 , 1, $), which is
added after creating u1 , and (A ::= ·aAb, u2 , 1, $), which is added after creating
u2 . Although both descriptors correspond to the same grammar position and
the same input position, they are distinct as their parent GSS nodes, u1 and
u2 , are diﬀerent. The same holds for the following descriptors corresponding
to the other alternatives of A: (A ::= ·aAc, u1 , 1, $), (A ::= ·aAc, u2 , 1, $) and
(A ::= ·a, u1 , 1, $), (A ::= ·a, u2 , 1, $). This example demonstrates that, although
the results of parsing A only depend on the alternatives of A and the current
input position, GLL creates separate descriptors for each instance of A, leading
to multiple executions of the same parsing actions.
However, the calls corresponding to diﬀerent instances of A at the same input position are not completely repeated. As can be seen, sharing happens one
level deeper in GSS. For example, processing (A ::= ·aAb, u1 , 1, $) or (A ::=
·aAb, u2 , 1, $) matches a, increases input position to 2 and moves the grammar

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing
u1

u4

A ::= aA · b

A ::= aA · b, 2

A ::= aA · b, 1

A, 0
L0 , 0

A ::= aA · c, 1
u2

(a) Original GSS

A ::= aA · c, 2

u3

A ::= aA · b
A, 1

A ::= aA · c

95

A, 2
A ::= aA · c

(b) New GSS

Fig. 1. Original and new GSS for parsing "aac" using A ::= aAb | aAc | a

pointer before A, leading to the call to the same instance of A at input position
2, which is handled by the same GSS node u4 connected to u1 and u2 . This sharing, however, happens per nonterminal instance. For example, if we consider the
input string "aaacc", a can be matched at input position 2, and therefore, the
same result but associated with diﬀerent instances of A will be stored in set P
as (u3 , (A, 2, 3)) and (u4 , (A, 2, 3)). Both nodes u3 and u4 will pop with the same
result (A, 2, 3), and given that both u3 and u4 are shared by u1 and u2 , descriptors that, again, encode the same parsing actions, but account for diﬀerent
parent GSS nodes, will be created: (A ::= aA·b, u1 , 3, w1 ), (A ::= aA·b, u2 , 3, w1 )
and (A ::= aA·c, u1 , 3, w2 ), (A ::= aA·c, u2 , 3, w2 ), where w1 = (A ::= aA·b, 0, 3)
and w2 = (A ::= aA · c, 0, 3).

3

More Eﬃcient GSS for GLL Parsing

In this section, we propose a new GSS that, compared to the original GSS,
provides a more eﬃcient sharing of parsing results in GLL parsing. We use the
fact that all calls corresponding to the same nonterminal and the same input
position should produce the same results, and therefore, can be shared, regardless
of a speciﬁc grammar rule in which the nonterminal occurs. The basic idea is
that, instead of recording return grammar positions in GSS nodes, i.e., grammar
slots of the form X ::= αA·β, names of nonterminals are recorded in GSS nodes,
and return grammar positions are carried on GSS edges. Figure 1(b) illustrates
the new GSS resulting from parsing "aac" using Γ0 .
First, we introduce new forms of GSS nodes and edges. Let X ::= α · Aβ be
the current grammar slot, i be the current input position, u be the current GSS
node, and w be the current SPPF node. As in the original GLL, at this point, a
GSS node is either retrieved, if such a node exists, or created. However, in our
setting, such a GSS node is of the form (A, i), i.e., with the label that consists
of the name of a nonterminal, in contrast to X ::= αA · β in the original GSS,
and the current input position. Let v be a GSS node labeled as (A, i). As in the
original GLL, a new GSS edge is created from v to u. However, in our setting,
a GSS edge is of the form (v, L, w, u), where, in addition to w as in the original
GSS, the return grammar position L, i.e., X ::= αA · β, is recorded.
Second, we remove the default GSS node u0 = (L0 , 0), which requires a special
label that does not correspond to any grammar position. In our setting, the initial
GSS node is of the form (S, 0) and corresponds to the call to the grammar start
symbol S at input position 0, e.g., (A, 0) in Figure 1(b).

96

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

Finally, we re-deﬁne the create and pop functions of the original GLL to
accommodate the changes to GSS. We keep the presentation of these functions
similar to the ones of the original GLL algorithm [8], so that the diﬀerence
between the deﬁnitions can be easily seen. The new deﬁnitions of the create and
pop functions are given below, where L is of the form X ::= αA · β, |α|, |β| ≥ 0,
u and v are GSS nodes, and w, y, z are SPPF nodes.
create(L, u, i, w) {
if (there exists a GSS node labeled (A, i)) {
let v be the GSS node labeled (A, i)
if (there is no GSS edge from v to u labeled L, w) {
add a GSS edge from v to u labeled L, w
for ((v, z) ∈ P) {
let y be the SPPF node returned by getNodeP(L, w, z)
add(L, u, h, y) where h is the right extent of y
}
}
} else {
create a new GSS node labeled (A, i)
let v be the newly-created GSS node
add a GSS edge from v to u labeled L, w
for (each alternative αk of A) { add(A ::= ·αk , v, i, $) }
}
return v
}
pop(u, i, z) {
if ((u, z) is not in P) {
add (u, z) to P
for (all GSS edges (u, L, w, v)) {
let y be the SPPF node returned by getNodeP(L, w, z)
add(L, v, i, y)
}
}
}

The create function takes four arguments: a grammar slot L of the form X ::=
αA · β, a GSS node u, an input position i, and an SPPF node w. If a GSS
node (A, i) exists (if-branch), the alternatives of A are not predicted at i again.
Instead, after a GSS edge (v, L, w, u) is added, if such an edge does not exist,
the currently available results of parsing A at i, stored in P, are reused. For each
result (v, z) in P, an SPPF node y is constructed, and a descriptor (L, u, h, y)
is added to continue parsing with the grammar slot X ::= αA · β and the next
input position h, corresponding to the right extent of y. If a GSS node (A, i) does
not exist (else-branch), such a node is ﬁrst created, then, an edge (v, L, w, u) is
added, and ﬁnally, a descriptor for each alternative of A with the input position
i and parent node v is created and added.
The pop function takes three arguments: a GSS node u, an input position i,
and an SPPF node z. If an entry (u, z) exists in P, the parser returns from the

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

97

function. Otherwise, (u, z) is added to P, and, for each outgoing GSS edge of u,
a descriptor is added to continue parsing with the grammar slot recorded on the
edge, the current input position and the SPPF node constructed from w and z.
As the signatures of the create and pop functions stay the same as in the
original GLL, replacing the original GSS with the new GSS does not require
any modiﬁcation to the code generated for each grammar slot in a GLL parser.
Also note that the new GSS resembles the memoization of function calls used
in functional programming, as a call to a nonterminal at an input position is
represented only by the name of the nonterminal and the input position.
3.1

Equivalence

As illustrated in Sections 2 and 3, in the original GLL, sharing of parsing results
for nonterminals is done at the level of nonterminal instances. On the other
hand, in GLL with the new GSS, the sharing is done at the level of nonterminals
themselves, which is more eﬃcient as, in general, it results in less descriptors
being created and processed. In Section 6 we present the performance results
showing that signiﬁcant performance speedup can be expected in practice. In
this section we discuss the diﬀerence between GLL parsing with the original
and new GSS for the general case, and show that the two GLL versions are
semantically equivalent.
The use of the new GSS, compared to the original one, prevents descriptors of
the form (L, u1 , i, w) and (L, u2 , i, w) to be created. These descriptors have the
same grammar slot, the same input position, the same SPPF node, but diﬀerent
parent GSS nodes. In GLL with the original GSS, such descriptors may be added
to R when, in the course of parsing, calls to diﬀerent instances of a nonterminal,
say A, at the same input position, say i, are made. Each such call corresponds to
a parsing state where the current grammar slot is of the form X ::= τ · Aμ (i.e.,
before A), and the current input position is i. To handle these calls, multiple
GSS nodes of the form (X ::= τ A · μ, i), where the grammar slot corresponds to
a grammar position after A, are created during parsing. We enumerate all such
grammar slots with Lk , and denote GSS nodes (Lk , i) as uk .
When a GSS node uk is created, descriptors of the form (A ::= ·γ, uk , i, $) are
∗
added. If a1 a2 . . . an is the input string and A ⇒ ai+1 . . . aj , uk will pop at j,
and processing descriptors of the form (A ::= ·γ, uk , i, $) will lead to creation of
descriptors of the form (A ::= αB · β, uk , l, w), i ≤ l ≤ j, i.e., in an alternative
of A, and of the form (A ::= γ·, uk , j, (A, i, j)), i.e., at the end of an alternative
of A. All these descriptors encode the parsing actions that do not semantically
depend on a speciﬁc uk . Indeed, starting from the same grammar position in an
alternative of A, say A ::= α · β, regardless of a speciﬁc uk , the parsing continues
with the next symbol in the alternative and the current input position, and either
produces an (intermediate) SPPF node, which does not depend on uk , moving
to the next symbol in the alternative, or fails. Finally, when descriptors of the
form (A ::= γ·, uk , j, (A, i, j)) are processed, the same SPPF node (A, i, j) will
be recorded in set P for each uk .

98

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

In the original GLL, when uk is being popped, for each (uk , z) in set P, where z
is of the form (A, i, j), and each outgoing edge (uk , w, v), a descriptor (Lk , v, j, y),
where y is the SPPF node returned by getNodeP(Lk , w, z), is added to continue
parsing after A. Let v be a GSS node with index h, then h and j are the left
and right extents of y, respectively. In the following we show how using the new
GSS, descriptors equivalent to (Lk , v, j, y) are created, but at the same time, the
problem of repeating the same parsing actions is avoided.
In GLL with the new GSS, when calls to diﬀerent instances of a nonterminal,
say A, at the same input position, say i, are made, a GSS node u = (A, i) is
retrieved or created. Similar to the original GLL, when u is created, descriptors
∗
of the form (A ::= ·γ, u, i, $) are added, and if A ⇒ ai+1 . . . aj , descriptors of the
form (A ::= αB · β, u, l, w), i ≤ l ≤ j, and of the form (A ::= γ·, u, j, (A, i, j))
will also be added. The essential diﬀerence with the original GLL is that the
label of u is A, and therefore, the descriptors corresponding to parsing A at i
are independent of the context in which A is used. Upon the ﬁrst call to A at
i, regardless of its current context, such descriptors are created, and the results
are reused for any such call in a diﬀerent context. Finally, when descriptors of
the form (A ::= γ·, u, j, (A, i, j)) are processed, the SPPF node z = (A, i, j) is
recorded as a single element (u, z) in set P.
In GLL parsing with the new GSS, whenever the parser reaches a state with
a grammar slot of the form X ::= τ · Aμ, and the input position i, there will be
an edge (u, Lk , w, v) added to u, where Lk is of the form X ::= τ A · μ. Finally,
for each (u, z) in set P and each edge (u, Lk , w, v), the descriptor (Lk , v, j, y) will
be added, where y is the SPPF node returned by getNodeP(Lk , w, z).
3.2

Complexity

In this section we show that replacing the original GSS with the new GSS does
not aﬀect the worst-case cubic runtime and space complexities of GLL parsing.
To introduce the new GSS into GLL parsing, we changed the forms of GSS
nodes and edges. We also re-deﬁned the create and pop functions to accommodate these changes. However, all these modiﬁcations had no eﬀect on the SPPF
construction, the getNode functions, and the code of GLL parsers that uses
create and pop to interact with GSS. Speciﬁcally, this implies that when the
main loop of a GLL parser executes, and the next descriptor is removed from
R, the execution proceeds in the same way as in the original GLL parsing until
the call to either create or pop is made.
First, we show that the space required for the new GSS is also at most O(n3 ).
In the new GSS, all GSS nodes have unique labels of the form (A, i), where
0 ≤ i ≤ n. Therefore, the new GSS has at most O(n) nodes. In the new GSS,
all GSS edges have unique labels of the form (u, L, w, v), where L is of the form
X ::= αA · β, the source GSS node u is of the form (A, i), and the target GSS
node v is of the form (X, j). The label of an edge in the new GSS consists of
L and w, where w has j and i as the left and right extents, which are also
the indices of v and u, respectively. Given that 0 ≤ j ≤ i ≤ n, the number of
outgoing edges for any source GSS node u is at most O(n), and the new GSS

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

99

has at most O(n2 ) edges. Thus the new GSS requires at most O(n) nodes and
at most O(n2 ) edges.
The worst-case O(n3 ) runtime complexity of the original GLL follows from
the fact that there are at most O(n2 ) descriptors, and processing a descriptor
may take at most O(n) time, by calling pop or create. Now, we show that
the worst-case complexity of both create and pop is still O(n), and the total
number of descriptors that can be added to R is still at most O(n2 ). All elements
in set P are of the form (v, z), where v is of the form (A, i), and z has i and j
as the left and right extents, respectively, where 0 ≤ i ≤ j ≤ n. Therefore, the
number of elements in P, corresponding to the same GSS node, is at most O(n).
Since a GSS node has at most O(n) outgoing edges, P has at most O(n) elements
corresponding to a GSS node, and the new GSS and P can be implemented using
arrays to allow constant time lookup, both create and pop have the worst-case
complexity O(n).
Finally, a descriptor is of the form (L, u, i, w), where w is either $ or has j and
i as the left and right extents, respectively, and j is also the index of u. Thus
the total number of descriptors that can be added to R is at most O(n2 ).

4

Optimizations for GLL Implementation

The GLL parsing algorithm [8] is described using a set view, e.g., U and P, which
eases the reasoning about the worst-case complexity, but leaves open the challenges of an eﬃcient implementation. The worst-case O(n3 ) complexity of GLL
parsing requires constant time lookup, e.g., to check if a descriptor has already
been added. Constant time lookup can be achieved using multi-dimensional arrays of size O(n2 ), however, such an implementation requires O(n2 ) initialization
time, which makes it impractical for near-linear parsing of real programming languages, whose grammars are nearly deterministic.
For near-linear parsing of real programming languages we need data structures
that provide amortized constant time lookup, without excessive overhead for
initialization. One way to achieve this is to use a combination of arrays and
linked lists as described in [10]. In this approach the user needs to specify, based
on the properties of the grammar, which dimensions should be implemented as
arrays or linked lists.
In this section we propose an eﬃcient hash table-based implementation of
GLL parsers. We show how the two most important lookup structures, U and P,
can be implemented using local hash tables in GSS nodes. The idea is based on
the fact that the elements stored in these data structures have a GSS node as a
property. Instead of having a global hash table, we factor out the GSS node and
use hash tables that are local to a GSS node. In an object-oriented language, we
can model a GSS node as an object that has pointers to its local hash tables.
In the following, we discuss diﬀerent implementations of U and P. We consider
GLL parsing with new GSS, and assume that n is the length of the input, and
|N | and |L| are the number of nonterminals and grammar slots, respectively.

100

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

Descriptor elimination set (U): set U is used to keep all the descriptors created
during parsing for duplicate elimination. A descriptor is of the form (L, u, i, w),
where L is of the form A ::= α·β, u is of the form (A, j), and w is either a dummy
node, or a symbol node of the form (x, j, i), when α = x, or an intermediate node
of the form (L, j, i). As can be seen, in a descriptor, the input index of the GSS
node is the same as the left extent of the SPPF node, and the input index of the
descriptor is the same as the right extent of the SPPF node. Also note that the
label of the GSS and SPPF node is already encoded in L. Thus we can eﬀectively
consider a descriptor as (L, i, j). We consider three implementations of U:
– Global Array: U can be implemented as an array of size |L| × n × n, which
requires O(n2 ) initialization time.
– Global hash table: U can be implemented as a single global hash table holding
elements of the form (L, i, j).
– Local hash table in a GSS node: U can be implemented as a local hash table
in a GSS node. This way, we only need to consider a descriptor as (L, i).
Popped elements (P): The set of popped elements, P, is deﬁned as a set of (u, w),
where u is a GSS node of the form (A, i), and w is an SPPF node of the form
(A, i, j). For eliminating duplicates, P can eﬀectively be considered as a set of
(A, i, j). We consider three implementations of P:
– Global Array: P can be implemented as an array of size |N | × n × n, which
requires O(n2 ) initialization time.
– Global hash table: P can be implemented as a global hash table holding
elements of the form (A, i, j).
– Local hash table in a GSS node: P can be implemented as a local hash table
in a GSS node. This way we can eliminate duplicate SPPF nodes using a
single integer, the right extent of the SPPF node (j).
Hash tables do not have the problem of multi-dimensional arrays, as the initialization cost is constant. However, using a global hash table is problematic for
parsing large input ﬁles as the number of elements is in order of millions, leading
to many hash collisions and resizing. For example, for a C# source ﬁle of 2000
lines of code, about 1,500,000 descriptors are created and processed.
Using local hash tables in GSS nodes instead of a single global hash table
provides considerable speedup when parsing large inputs with large grammars.
First, by distributing hash tables over GSS nodes, we eﬀectively reduce the number of properties needed for hash code calculation. Second, local hash tables will
contain fewer entries, resulting in fewer hash collisions and requiring fewer resizing. In the Iguana parsing framework we use the standard java.util.HashSet
as the implementation of hash tables. Our preliminary results show that, for
example, by using a local hash table for implementing U instead of a global one,
we can expect speedup of factor two. Detailed evaluation of the optimizations
presented in this section, and their eﬀect on memory usage, is future work.

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

101

There are two algorithmic optimizations possible that further improve the
performance of GLL parsers. These optimizations remove certain runtime checks
that can be shown to be redundant based on the following properties:
1) There is at most one call to the create function with the same arguments.
Thus no check for duplicate GSS edges is needed.
The properties of a GSS edge (v, L, w, u) are uniquely identiﬁed by the arguments
to create: L, u, i, w, where L is of the form X ::= αA · β, and v = (A, i).
Therefore, if it can be shown that there is at most one call to create with the
same arguments, the check for duplicate GSS edges can be safely removed.
Let us consider a call create(X ::= αA · β, u, i, w). This call can only happen
if a descriptor of one of the following forms has been processed, where τ is a
possibly empty sequence of terminals and j ≤ i: (1) (X ::= ·αAβ, u, j, $) when
α = τ ; or (2) (X ::= γB · τ Aβ, u, j, z) when α = γBτ , |γ| ≥ 0. Therefore, for the
call to happen more than once, the same descriptor has to be processed again.
However, this can never happen as all the duplicate descriptors are eliminated.
2) There is at most one call to the getNodeP function with the same arguments.
Thus no check for duplicate packed nodes is needed.
Let us consider a call getNodeP(A ::= α · β, w, z), where w is either $ or a nonpacked node having i and k as the left and right extents, and z is a non-packed
node having k and j as the left and right extents. This call may create and add a
packed node (A ::= α · β, k) under the parent node, which is either (A, i, j) when
|β| = 0, or (A ::= α · β, i, j) otherwise. Clearly, the same call to getNodeP will
try to add the same packed node under the existing parent node.
Now suppose that the same call to getNodeP happens for the second time.
Given that a GSS node is ensured to pop with the same result at most once
(set P and pop), the second call can only happen if a descriptor of one of the
following forms has been processed for the second time, where u = (A, i) and
τ is a possibly empty sequence of terminals: (1) (A ::= ·αβ, u, i, $) when either
α = τ or α = τ X; or (2) (A ::= γB · σβ, u, l, y), i ≤ l ≤ k, when α = γBσ,
|γ| ≥ 0, and either σ = τ or σ = τ X. This can never happen as all the duplicate
descriptors are eliminated.
Note that the second optimization is only applicable for GLL parsers with
the new GSS. In the original GLL, u can be of the form (X ::= μA · ν, i),
and therefore, multiple descriptors with the same grammar slot, the same input
position, the same SPPF node, but diﬀerent parent nodes, corresponding to
multiple instances of A, can be added, resulting in multiple calls to getNodeP
with the same arguments.

5

Disambiguation Filters for Scannerless GLL Parsing

Parsing programming languages is often done using a separate scanning phase
before parsing, in which a scanner (lexer) ﬁrst transforms a stream of characters
to a stream of tokens. Besides performance gain, another important reason for
a separate scanning phase is that deterministic character-level grammars are

102

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

virtually nonexistent. The main drawback of performing scanning before parsing
is that, in some cases, it is not possible to uniquely identify the type of tokens
without the parsing context (grammar rule in which they appear). An example is
nested generic types in Java, e.g., List<List<T>>. Without the parsing context,
the scanner cannot unambiguously detect the type of >> as it can be either a
right-shift operator or two closing angle brackets.
Scannerless parsing [11,12] eliminates the need for a separate scanning phase
by treating the lexical and context-free deﬁnitions the same. A scannerless parser
solves the problems of identifying the type of tokens by parsing each character in
its parsing context, and provides the user with a uniﬁed formalism for both syntactical and lexical deﬁnitions. This facilitates modular grammar development
at the lexical level, which is essential for language extension and embedding [13].
A separate scanning phase usually resolves the character-level ambiguities
in favor of the longest matched token and excludes keywords from identiﬁers.
In absence of a separate scanner, such ambiguities should be resolved during
parsing. In the rest of this section we show how most common character-level
disambiguation ﬁlters [14] can be implemented in a GLL parser.
To illustrate character-level ambiguities, we use the grammar below, which
is adapted from [14]. This grammar deﬁnes a Term as either a sequence of two
terms, an identiﬁer, a number, or the keyword "int". Id is deﬁned as one or
more repetition of a single character, and WS deﬁnes a possibly empty blank.
Term ::= Term WS Term | Id | Num | "int"
Id
::= Chars
Chars ::= Chars Char | Char
Char ::= 'a' | .. | 'z'
Num
::= '1' | .. |'9'
WS
::= ' ' | 

This grammar is ambiguous. For example, the input string "hi" can be parsed
as either Term(Id("hi")), or Term(Term(Id("h")),Term(Id("i"))). Following the longest match rule, the ﬁrst derivation is the intended one, as in the second one "h" is recognized as an identiﬁer, while it is followed by "i". We can use
a follow restriction ( /
−−) to disallow an identiﬁer to be followed by another character: Id ::= Chars -/- Char. Another ambiguity occurs in the input string
"intx" which can be parsed as either Term(Id("intx")) or Term(Term("int"),
Term(Id("x"))). We can solve this problem by adding a precede restriction ( \
−−)
as follows: Id ::= Char -\- Chars, specifying that Id cannot be preceded by
a character. Finally, we should exclude the recognition of "int" as Id. For this,
we use an exclusion rule: Id ::= Chars \"int".
Below we formally deﬁne each of these restrictions and show how they can be
integrated in GLL parsing. For follow and precede restrictions we only consider
the case where the restriction is a single character, denoted by c. This can be
trivially extended to other restrictions such as character ranges or arbitrary
regular expressions. We assume that I represents the input string as an array of
characters and i holds the current input position.

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

103

Follow restriction. For a grammar rule A ::= αxβ, a follow restriction for the
symbol x is written as A ::= αx /
−− cβ, meaning that derivations of the form
∗
γAσ⇒γαxβσ ⇒γαxcτ are disallowed. For implementing follow restrictions, we
consider the grammar position A ::= αx·β. If x is a terminal, the implementation
is straightforward: if i < |I| and I[i] = c, the control ﬂow returns to the main
loop, eﬀectively terminating this parsing path. If x is a nonterminal, we consider
the situation where a GLL parser is about to create a descriptor for A ::= αx · β.
This happens when pop is executed for a GSS node (x, j) at i. While iterating
over the GSS edges, if a GSS edge labeled A ::= αx · β is reached, the condition
of the follow restriction associated with this grammar position will be checked.
If I[i] = c, no descriptor for this label will be added.
Precede Restriction. For a grammar rule A ::= αxβ, a precede restriction for
the symbol x is written as A ::= αc −−
\ xβ, meaning that derivations of the
∗
form γAσ⇒γαxβσ ⇒τ cxβσ are disallowed. The implementation of precede restrictions is as follows. When a GLL parser is at the grammar slot A ::= α · xβ,
if i > 0 and I[i − 1] = c, the control ﬂow returns to the main loop, eﬀectively
terminating this parsing path.
Exclusion. For a grammar rule A ::= αXβ, the exclusion of string s from the
nonterminal X is written as A ::= αX\sβ, meaning that the language accepted
by the nonterminal X should not contain the string s, i.e., L(X\s) = L(X) −
{s}, where L deﬁnes the language accepted by a nonterminal. Similar to the
implementation of follow restrictions for a nonterminal, when a GSS node (X, j)
is popped at i, and the parser iterates over the outgoing GSS edges, if an edge
A ::= αX · β is found, the condition of the exclusion is checked. If the substring
of the input from j to i matches s, no descriptor for the grammar position
A ::= αX · β is added, which eﬀectively terminates this parsing path.

6

Performance Evaluation

To evaluate the eﬃciency of the new GSS for GLL parsing, we use a highly
ambiguous grammar and grammars of three real programming languages: Java,
C# and OCaml. We ran the GLL parsers generated from Iguana in two diﬀerent
modes: new and original, corresponding to the new and original GSS, respectively. Iguana is our Java-based GLL parsing framework that can be conﬁgured
to run with the new or original GSS, while keeping all other aspects of the algorithm, such as SPPF creation, the same. The optimizations given in Section 4,
with the exception of removing checks for packed nodes, which is only applicable
to GLL parser with the new GSS, are applied to both modes.
We ran the experiments on a machine with a quad-core Intel Core i7 2.6 GHz
CPU and 16 GB of memory running Mac OS X 10.9.4. We executed the parsers
on a 64-Bit Oracle HotSpotTM JVM version 1.7.0 55 with the -server ﬂag. To
allow for JIT optimizations, the JVM was ﬁrst warmed up, by executing a large
sample data, and then each test is executed 10 times. The median running time
(CPU user time) is reported.

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

20000

40000

Original GSS
New GSS

0

CPU user time (milliseconds)

104

0

100

200

300

400

Number of b's

Fig. 2. Running the GLL parsers for grammar S ::= SSS | SS | b
Table 1. The result of running highly ambiguous grammar on strings of b’s
size
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400

6.1

time (ms)

# GSS nodes

# GSS edges

new

original

new

original

new

original

6
45
151
386
791
1403
2367
3639

35
336
1361
4080
9824
18 457
32 790
50 648

51
101
151
201
251
301
351
401

251
501
751
1001
1251
1501
1751
2001

3877
15 252
34 127
60 502
94 377
135 752
184 627
241 002

18 935
75 360
169 285
300 710
469 635
676 060
919 985
1 201 410

Highly Ambiguous Grammar

To measure the eﬀect of the new GSS for GLL parsing on highly ambiguous
grammars, we use the grammar S ::= SSS | SS | b. The results of running a
GLL parser with the new and original GSS for this grammar on strings of b’s
is shown in Figure 2. As can be seen, the performance gain is signiﬁcant. The
median and maximum speedup factors for the highly ambiguous grammar, as
shown in Figure 3, are 10 and 14, respectively. To explain the observed speedup,
we summarize the results of parsing the strings of b’s in Table 1. Note that
the number of nodes and edges for the original GSS are slightly more than the
numbers reported in [8], as we do not include the check for ﬁrst and follow sets.
As can be seen, GLL with the new GSS has n + 1 GSS nodes for inputs of length
n, one for each call to S at input positions 0 to n. For GLL with the original
GSS, there are 5 grammar slots that can be called: S ::= S · SS, S ::= SS · S,
S ::= SSS·, S ::= S · S, and S ::= SS·, which lead to 5n + 1 GSS nodes. In
such a highly ambiguous grammar, most GSS nodes are connected, therefore,
the iteration operations over edges in the create and pop functions will take
much more time, as explained in Section 3.1.

●

105

●
●
●
●

● ●
●

Amb OCaml

C#

Java

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●●● ●

●●●●
●●
●●
●
●●
●●●●
●●
●
●●

1

2

3

4

5

6

●
●
●
●●●

●

7

8

●

●●●

●

●

9

10

11

●

12

13

14

Fig. 3. Comparing the speedup factor of the new and original GSS

6.2

Grammars of Programming Languages

To measure the eﬀect of the new GSS on the grammars of real programming
languages, we have chosen the grammars of three programming languages from
their language reference manual.
Java: We used the grammar of Java 7 from the Java Language Speciﬁcation [15]
(JLS). The grammar contains 329 nonterminals, 728 rules, and 2410 grammar
slots. We have parsed 7449 Java ﬁles from the source code of JDK 1.7.0 60-b19.
As shown in Figure 3, the median and maximum speedup factors for Java are
1.5 and 2.3, respectively.
C#: We used the grammar of C# 5 from the C# Language Speciﬁcation [16].
The grammar contains 534 nonterminals, 1275 rules, and 4195 grammar slots.
The main challenge in parsing C# ﬁles was dealing with C# directives, such as
#if and #region. C# front ends, in contrast to C++, do not have a separate
preprocessing phase for directives. Most C# directives can be ignored as comment, with the exception of the conditional ones, as ignoring them may lead to
parse error. As the purpose of this evaluation was to measure the performance of
GLL parsers on C# ﬁles, and not conﬁguration-preserving parsing, we ran the
GNU C preprocessor on the test ﬁles to preprocess the conditional directives.
The rest of the directives were treated as comments. We have parsed 2764 C#
ﬁles from the build-preview release of the Roslyn Compiler. As shown in Figure 3,
the median and maximum speedup factors for C# are 1.7 and 3, respectively.
OCaml: We used the grammar of OCaml 4.0.1 from the OCaml reference manual
[17]. The grammar of OCaml is diﬀerent from Java and C# in two aspects.
First, OCaml is an expression-based language, as opposed to Java and C#.
This provides us with a grammar with diﬀerent characteristics for testing the
eﬀectiveness of the new GSS. Second, the reference grammar of OCaml is highly
ambiguous, having numerous operators with diﬀerent associativity and priority

106

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

levels. We used a grammar rewriting technique [18] to obtain an unambiguous
grammar. The rewritten grammar contains 685 nonterminals, 5728 rules, and
27294 grammar slots. We have parsed 871 ﬁles from the OCaml 4.0.1 source
release. As shown in Figure 3, the median and maximum speedup factors for
OCaml are 5.2 and 13, respectively. The rewriting technique used in [18] to
encode precedence rules leads to more rules. This can be one reason for the
more signiﬁcant speedup for the OCaml case, compared to Java and C#. The
other possible reason is the nature of OCaml programs that have many nested
expressions, requiring high non-determinism. The case of OCaml shows that the
new GSS is very eﬀective for parsing large, complex grammars, such as OCaml.

7

Related Work

For many years deterministic parsing techniques were the only viable option
for parsing programming languages. As machines became more powerful, and
the need for developing parsers in other areas such as reverse-engineering and
source code analysis increased, generalized parsing techniques were considered
for parsing programming languages. In this section we discuss several related
work on applying generalized parsing to parsing programming languages.
Generalized parsing. Generalized parsing algorithms have the attractive property
that they can behave linearly on deterministic grammars. Therefore, for the
grammars that are nearly deterministic, which is the case for most programming
languages, using generalized parsing is feasible [19]. For example, the ASF+SDF
Meta-Environment [7] uses a variation of GLR parsing for source code analysis
and reverse engineering.
The original GLR parsing algorithm by Tomita [5] fails to terminate for some
grammars with rules. Farshi [20] provides a ﬁx for rules, but his ﬁx requires
exhaustive GSS search after some reductions. Scott and Johnstone [21] provide
an alternative to Farshi’s ﬁx, called Right Nulled GLR (RNGLR), which is more
elegant and more eﬃcient. GLR parsers have worst-case O(nk+1 ) complexity,
where k is the length of the longest rule in the grammar [9]. BRNGLR is a
variation of RNGLR that uses binarized SPPFs to enable GLR parsing in cubic
time. Elkhound [6] is a GLR parser, based on Farshi’s version, that switches to
the machinery of an LR parser on deterministic parts of the grammar, leading
to signiﬁcant performance improvement. Another faster variant of GLR parsing
is presented by Aycock and Horspool [22], which uses a larger LR automata,
trading space for time.
Disambiguation. Disambiguation techniques that are used in diﬀerent parsing
technologies can be categorized in two groups: implicit or explicit disambiguation. Implicit disambiguation is mostly used in parsing techniques that return
at most one derivation tree. Perhaps the name nondeterminism-reducer is a
more correct term, as these techniques essentially reduce non-determinism during parsing, regardless if it leads to ambiguity or not. Yacc [3], PEGs [23] and

Faster, Practical GLL Parsing

107

ANTLR [24] are examples of parsing techniques that use implicit disambiguation
rules. For example, in Yacc, shift/reduce conﬂicts are resolved in favor of shift,
and PEGs and ANTLR use the order of the alternatives. These approaches do
not work in all cases and may lead to surprises for the language engineer.
Explicit disambiguation is usually done using declarative disambiguation rules.
In this approach, the grammar formalism allows the user to explicitly deﬁne the
disambiguation rules, which can be applied either during parsing, by pruning
parsing paths that violate the rules, or be applied after the parsing is done,
as a parse forest processing step. Post-parse ﬁltering is only possible when using a generalized parser that can return all the derivations in form of a parse
forest. Aho et. al show how to modify LR(1) parsing tables to resolve shift/reduce conﬂicts based on the the priority and associativity of operators [25]. In
Scannerless GLR (SGLR) which is used in SDF2 [26], operator precedence and
character-level restrictions such as keyword exclusion are implemented as parse
table modiﬁcations, but some other disambiguation ﬁlters such as prefer and
avoid as post-parse ﬁlters [14]. Economopoulos et al. [27] investigate the implementation of SDF disambiguation ﬁlters in the RNGLR parsing algorithm and
report considerable performance improvement.

8

Conclusions

In this paper we presented an essential optimization to GLL parsing, by proposing a new GSS, which provides a more eﬃcient sharing of parsing results.
We showed that GLL parsers with the new GSS are worst-case cubic in time
and space, and are signiﬁcantly faster on both highly ambiguous and neardeterministic grammars. As future work, we plan to measure the eﬀect of the new
GSS and the optimizations presented in Section 4 on memory, and to compare
the performance of our GLL implementation with other parsing techniques.
Acknowledgments. We thank Alex ten Brink who proposed the modiﬁcation
to the GSS in GLL recognizers. Special thanks to Elizabeth Scott and Adrian
Johnstone for discussions on GLL parsing, and to Jurgen Vinju for his feedback.

References
1. Knuth, D.E.: On the Translation of Languages from Left to Right. Information
and Control 8(6), 607–639 (1965)
2. Deremer, F.L.: Practical Translators for LR(k) Languages. PhD thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology (1969)
3. Johnson, S.C.: Yacc: Yet Another Compiler-Compiler AT&T Bell Laboratories,
http://dinosaur.compilertools.net/yacc/
4. Gosling, J., Joy, B., Steele, G.L.: The Java Language Speciﬁcation, 1st edn.
Addison-Wesley Longman Publishing Co., Inc, Boston (1996)
5. Tomita, M.: Eﬃcient Parsing for Natural Language: A Fast Algorithm for Practical
Systems. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Norwell (1985)
6. McPeak, S., Necula, G.C.: Elkhound: A Fast, Practical GLR Parser Generator. In:
Duesterwald, E. (ed.) CC 2004. LNCS, vol. 2985, pp. 73–88. Springer, Heidelberg
(2004)

108

A. Afroozeh and A. Izmaylova

7. van den Brand, M., Heering, J., Klint, P., Olivier, P.A.: Compiling language deﬁnitions: The ASF+SDF compiler. ACM Trans. Program. Lang. Syst. 24 (2002)
8. Scott, E., Johnstone, A.: GLL parse-tree generation. Science of Computer Programming 78(10), 1828–1844 (2013)
9. Johnson, M.: The Computational Complexity of GLR Parsing. In: Tomita, M. (ed.)
Generalized LR Parsing, pp. 35–42. Springer US (1991)
10. Johnstone, A., Scott, E.: Modelling GLL parser implementations. In: Malloy, B.,
Staab, S., van den Brand, M. (eds.) SLE 2010. LNCS, vol. 6563, pp. 42–61. Springer,
Heidelberg (2011)
11. Salomon, D.J., Cormack, G.V.: Scannerless NSLR(1) Parsing of Programming Languages. In: Programming Language Design and Implementation, PLDI 1989, pp.
170–178 (1989)
12. Visser, E.: Scannerless Generalized-LR Parsing. Technical report, University of
Amsterdam (1997)
13. Bravenboer, M., Tanter, É., Visser, E.: Declarative, Formal, and Extensible Syntax
Deﬁnition for AspectJ. In: Object-Oriented Programming, Systems, Languages,
and Applications, OOPSLA 2006, pp. 209–228 (2006)
14. den van Brand, M.G.J., Scheerder, J., Vinju, J.J., Visser, E.: Disambiguation Filters for Scannerless Generalized LR Parsers. In: Nigel Horspool, R. (ed.) CC 2002.
LNCS, vol. 2304, pp. 143–158. Springer, Heidelberg (2002)
15. Gosling, J., Joy, B., Steele, G., Bracha, G., Buckley, A.: The Java Language Speciﬁcation Java SE 7 Edition (February 2013)
16. Microsoft Corporation: C# Language Speciﬁcation Version 5.0 (2013)
17. Leroy, X., Doligez, D., Frisch, A., Garrigue, J., Rémy, D., Vouillon, J.: The OCaml
system release 4.01: Documentation and user’s manual (September 2013)
18. Afroozeh, A., van den Brand, M., Johnstone, A., Scott, E., Vinju, J.: Safe Speciﬁcation of Operator Precedence Rules. In: Erwig, M., Paige, R.F., Van Wyk, E.
(eds.) SLE 2013. LNCS, vol. 8225, pp. 137–156. Springer, Heidelberg (2013)
19. Johnstone, A., Scott, E., Economopoulos, G.: Generalised parsing: Some costs. In:
Duesterwald, E. (ed.) CC 2004. LNCS, vol. 2985, pp. 89–103. Springer, Heidelberg
(2004)
20. Nozohoor-Farshi, R.: GLR Parsing for -Grammers. In: Tomita, M. (ed.) Generalized LR Parsing, pp. 61–75. Springer US (1991)
21. Scott, E., Johnstone, A.: Right Nulled GLR Parsers. ACM Trans. Program. Lang.
Syst. 28(4), 577–618 (2006)
22. Aycock, J.: Faster Generalized LR Parsing. In: Jähnichen, S. (ed.) CC 1999. LNCS,
vol. 1575, pp. 32–46. Springer, Heidelberg (1999)
23. Ford, B.: Parsing Expression Grammars: A Recognition-Based Syntactic Foundation. In: Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 2004, pp. 111–122 (2004)
24. Parr, T., Harwell, S., Fisher, K.: Adaptive LL(*) Parsing: The Power of Dynamic
Analysis. In: Object Oriented Programming Systems Languages and Applications,
OOPSLA 2014, pp. 579–598. ACM (2014)
25. Aho, A.V., Johnson, S.C., Ullman, J.D.: Deterministic Parsing of Ambiguous
Grammars. In: Principles of Programming Languages, POPL 1973, pp. 1–21 (1973)
26. Visser, E.: Syntax Deﬁnition for Language Prototyping. PhD thesis, University of
Amsterdam (1997)
27. Economopoulos, G., Klint, P., Vinju, J.: Faster Scannerless GLR Parsing. In: de
Moor, O., Schwartzbach, M.I. (eds.) CC 2009. LNCS, vol. 5501, pp. 126–141.
Springer, Heidelberg (2009)

